Add documentation for user-configurable overrides module (#3374)
grafana/tempo: docs/sources/tempo/operations/user-configurable-overrides.md

---
title: User-configurable overrides
menuTitle: Configure Tempo overrides through the user-configurable overrides API
description: Configure Tempo overrides through the user-configurable overrides API
weight: 90
---

# User-configurable overrides

User-configurable overrides in Tempo let you change overrides for your tenant using an API.
Instead of modifying a file or Kubernetes configmap, you (and other services relying on Tempo) can use this API to modify the overrides directly.

### Architecture

![user-configurable-overrides-architecture.png](./user-configurable-overrides-architecture.png)

> User-configurable are stored in an object store bucket managed by Tempo.

Reviewer: Is the word overrides missing? 
```suggestion
User-configurable overrides are stored in an object store bucket managed by Tempo.
```

{{% admonition type="note" %}}
We recommend using a different bucket for overrides and traces storage, but they can share a bucket if needed.
When sharing a bucket, make sure any lifecycle rules are scoped correctly to not remove data of user-configurable overrides module.
{{% /admonition %}}

Overrides of every tenant are stored at `/{tenant name}/overrides.json`:

```
overrides/
├── 1/
│   └── overrides.json
└── 2/
└── overrides.json
```

> This bucket is regularly polled and a copy of the limits is kept in-memory. When requesting the overrides for a tenant, the overrides module will now:
> 
> 1. check this override is set in the user-configurable overrides, if so return that value
> 2. check if this override is set in the runtime config (configmap), if so return that value
> 3. return the default value

Reviewer: What polls the bucket? Is it Tempo? (guessing it is, based on the diagram) 
```suggestion
Tempo regularly polls this bucket and keeps a copy of the limits in-memory. When requesting the overrides for a tenant, the overrides module:

1. Checks this override is set in the user-configurable overrides, if so return that value
2. Checks if this override is set in the runtime config (configmap), if so return that value
3. Returns the default value
```

### Supported fields

> User-configurable overrides are designed to be a subset of the runtime overrides. See [Overrides]{{< relref "../configuration/_index#overrides" >}} for all overrides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User-configurable overrides are designed to be a subset of the runtime overrides. Refer to [Overrides]{{< relref "../configuration/_index#overrides" >}} for information about all overrides.
```

{{% admonition type="note" %}}

> When a field is set in both the user-configurable overrides and the runtime overrides, the value from the user-configurable overrides will be returned.

Reviewer 2: might be usefult to split these notes into two and expand by what we mean by returned.

Reviewer: Would you want the expanded text inside the note or as a paragraph around the note? We can make these in to separate notes easily enough.

Reviewer 2: no strong preference, anything works as long as we highlight both of these items to reader.

Author: I've tweaked this a bit:
- instead of returned use "will take priority" (there might be a better way to formulate this)
- I've moved the section about priority to regular text and kept the exception in a note

The only exception is `processors` which will merge values from both sources.
{{% /admonition %}}

```yaml
[forwarders: <list of strings>]

metrics_generator:

  [processors: <list of strings>]
  [collection_interval: <duration>]
  [disable_collection: <bool> | default = false]

  processor:

    service_graphs:
      [histogram_buckets: <list of float>]
      [dimensions: <list of string>]
      [peer_attributes: <list of string>]
      [enable_client_server_prefix: <bool>]

    span_metrics:
      [histogram_buckets: <list of float>]
      [dimensions: <list of string>]
      [intrinsic_dimensions: <map string to bool>]
      [filter_policies: [
        [
          include/exclude:
            match_type: <string> # options: strict, regexp
            attributes:
              - key: <string>
                value: <any>
        ]
      ]
      [enable_target_info: <bool>]
      [target_info_excluded_dimensions: <list of string>]
```

### API

> All API requests are handled on the `/api/overrides` endpoint, the module supports `GET`, `POST`, `PATCH` and `DELETE` requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All API requests are handled on the `/api/overrides` endpoint. The module supports `GET`, `POST`, `PATCH`, and `DELETE` requests.
```

> This endpoint is tenant-specific, if Tempo is run in multitenant mode all requests should have an appropriate `X-Scope-OrgID` header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This endpoint is tenant-specific. If Tempo is run in multitenant mode, all requests should have an appropriate `X-Scope-OrgID` header.
```

> If tenant is run in distributed mode, only the query-frontend will accept API requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the tenant is run in distributed mode, only the query-frontend will accept API requests.
```

Example: `curl -X POST -v -H "X-Scope-OrgID: 3" -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data "{}"

```
PATCH /api/overrides
```

Update the existing overrides by patching it with the payload. It follows the JSON merge patch protocol ([RFC 7386](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7386)).

Example: `curl -X PUT -v -H "X-Scope-OrgID: 3" -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data "{\"forwarders\":null}"

```
DELETE /api/overrides
```

Delete the existing overrides.

Example: `➜ curl -X DELETE -H "X-Scope-OrgID: 3" -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides`

#### Versioning

To handle concurrent read and write operations, overrides are stored with a version in the backend.
Whenever the overrides are returned, the response will have an Etag header with the current version.

```
$ curl -v http://localhost:3100/api/overrides
...
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Content-Type: application/json
< Etag: 1697726795401423
< Date: Wed, 07 Feb 2024 17:49:04 GMT
< Content-Length: 118
...
```

Requests that modify or delete overrides need to pass the current version using the `If-Match` header:

```

> $ curl -X POST -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data "..."

Reviewer 2: not required but would be helpful to include an example where `--data` is in file..

ex: `curl -X POST -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data @overrides.json` here overrides are in overrides.json, location in `pwd`

Reviewer: Thank you for the example! i've added it below. What do you think?

```

> 

Reviewer: Something like this?  The suggestion isn't in ` ``` ` because the editor messes up when I use that. 

```suggestion
This example uses uses overrides in the `overrides.json` file with the location in `pwd`: 

`curl -X POST -H "X-Scope-OrgID: 3" -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data @overrides.json`

```

Author: Yep this looks good :+1:

> If the version does not match the version in the backend the request will be rejected with HTTP error 412.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the version does not match the version in the backend, the request is rejected with HTTP error 412.
```

#### Conflicting runtime overrides check

This is an optional check that will block update requests if:

1. there are no user-configurable overrides yet for this tenant
2. there are runtime overrides set 

This prevents callers 

Explain how the check works, how to configure and how to bypass.

> This check can be bypassed by setting the query parameter `skip-conflicting-overrides-check=true`

Reviewer: Are you still working on this section? There are unfinished sentences and some missing punctuation.

Reviewer: @kvrhdn I'm happy to approve the other sections in the PR. This part with incomplete sentences is why I haven't approved it.

Author: I forgot I didn't fully write this out yet, fixed it now

#### Versioning

To handle concurrent read and write operations, overrides are stored with a version in the backend.
Whenever the overrides are returned, the response will have an Etag header with the current version.

```
$ curl -v http://localhost:3100/api/overrides
...
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Content-Type: application/json
< Etag: 1697726795401423
< Date: Wed, 07 Feb 2024 17:49:04 GMT
< Content-Length: 118
...
```

Requests that modify or delete overrides need to pass the current version using the `If-Match` header:

```
$ curl -X POST -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data "..."
```
This example uses uses overrides in the `overrides.json` file with the location in `pwd`: 

`curl -X POST -H "X-Scope-OrgID: 3" -H "If-Match: 1697726795401423" http://localhost:3100/api/overrides --data @overrides.json`

If the version does not match the version in the backend, the request is rejected with HTTP error 412.

#### Conflicting runtime overrides check

Overrides set through the user-configurable overrides take priority over runtime overrides.
This can lead to misleading scenarios because a value set in the runtime overrides is not actively being used.

> To warn users about preexisting runtime overrides there is an optional check for conflicting runtime overrides.
> If enabled requests are rejected if:
> 
> 1. there are no user-configurable overrides yet for this tenant
> 2. there are runtime overrides set that contain overrides present in the user-configurable overrides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To warn users about preexisting runtime overrides, there is an optional check for conflicting runtime overrides.
If enabled requests are rejected if:

1. There are no user-configurable overrides yet for this tenant.
2. There are runtime overrides set that contain overrides present in the user-configurable overrides.
```
